This repository contains scripts for a Shiny app that provides key measures of the population trend and distribution for the Northeast U.S. population of Roseate Terns and the JAGS specification of the underlying hierarchical trend model, including code to obtain posterior estimates and calculate measures of population distribution across islands. 

‘rote_pop_app.R’ is a Shiny application that serves as a one-stop destination for the latest information on the population status of the Northeast U.S. population of Roseate Terns (Sterna dougallii dougallii). The plots show observed data on alongside estimates of key measures of the population trend and distribution, with robust uncertainty bounds. Users can also download clean, vector-based graphics for any needs related to communicating the latest information on population status (e.g. grant reports, blog articles, fact sheets, other media). Each plot type has a few parameters that can be adjusted to customize the output for its intended purpose or audience.

‘rote_pop_trends_JAGS.R’ is a script that specifies a hierarchical trend model that quantifies patterns in the population dynamics of Roseate Terns. The model is akin to the hierarchical models that are used to quantify trend estimates for Breeding Bird Survey data, but I have specified it to better describe the behavior of a colonial population. The basic structure of the tern model is a Poisson generalized linear model with year effects and random intercepts for region. The specification for year effects includes a parameter for first-order temporal autocorrelation. The trend for each island by is determined by a regression equation that includes a fixed effect for the population-wide trend, a random effect for region, and a random effect for island. This script also contains code to 1) obtain posterior distributions for key 
population measures, including the overall trend line, the percent annual change in population size, annual variation, and region/site effects; and 2) quantify trends in the distribution of the population over time using an index of “dominance” (Simpson’s diversity index).
